I think the real question we all have to
answer when engaged in research is what
kind of person are you going to become
and I'm here absolutely refusing to fall
into the trap of saying well how much
money you gonna make because that's not
the question that's not the constraint
that's not the limit we're surrounded by
people with money a mystery we just
vacation in the South of France
what's the financial worth of any ten
people we walk past or ten yachts we
walk past and we were just in Las Vegas
and you walk past people who are not
just wealthy but wasting a lot of money
money is everywhere and yet the
potential to make a positive difference
in the world is scarce
why because self-cultivation is scarce
self-discipline is scarce clarity of
mind is scarce right what's common is
the mind frame to sit at a poker table
smoking cigarettes and drinking beer and
ignoring a beautiful woman in a bikini
who's dancing about three meters away
from you while you you know play with
these cards it's sickening but this is
the human condition this is the the kind
of ignorance in the unexamined life
we're all born into and some people play
poker and some people play video games
and for some people it's its other vices
right but the ultimate constraint on
your ability to make the world a better
place is you it's easy to be cynical
about these things it's easy to be
contemptuous and dismissive when you get
this kind of question from many many
different people I received the question
why he read books how can anyone
possibly justify spending their time
reading nonfiction doing original
research trying to learn new things
instead of just playing video games just
living a life for short-term
self-indulgent pleasures and there's no
doubt some of the
questions were insincere but I tried to
muster up the optimism to answer as many
of them as I could treating them as
sincere treating them not just as
insults from people who are making
excuses for their their lifestyle
choices in many cases lifestyle choices
that they don't have a vet so the way
this one is phrased is also interesting
quote I am curious if you have a
positive example in mind okay that , was
misplaced I'm curious if you have a
positive example in mind it seems to be
human nature that people just want to
enjoy life and avoid doing things they
don't like why would they be interested
in the history politics or culture of
Africa of course could be Africa could
be Asia could be any example here why is
it better to read a newspaper than
having fun with friends so you can see I
was pretty Curt I was pretty brief in my
reply to this but it's interesting that
this is also framed in do you have an
example in mind do you have a positive
role model in mind and I say yeah and
let's really talk about and think about
people like Socrates in contrast
characters like Batman in fiction or
what what children are perceiving or
receiving um but yeah it's it's deeply
saddening to imagine people growing up
with this basic concept of reading books
doing original research and and learning
learning about the real world not just
learning about fiction not just reading
for entertainment but reading to make
yourself a better person and to make a
world the world a better place that
that's so fundamentally alien that you'd
get this as a sincere question and you
can see from this reply it actually was
a sincere question this person went on
to watch my other video and education
and politics what do I read and are
checking out some of the other stuff in
my channel this is someone who was
really sincerely questioning why read
books there you go guys when you get
that kind of question on YouTube it's
not always trolling sometimes it's
people really stopping and reflecting on
their own lives and maybe on the lives
of the role models that grown up with
one of the most corrupting influences
that universities have on our society is
that people misapprehend them as if they
represent learning as if they represent
education the modern Western university
is a research institution they represent
an opportunity to do original research
the modern Western University is a
credential issuing institution they
represent the opportunity to get a
credential tragically if you really want
to know about education and learning
almost all of that goes on it's actually
conversa t that's what universities are
today i can become fluent in Chinese and
then I can go to a university and they
can give me a credential for writing up
my original research on Chinese
literature Chinese poetry you name it
right
that's when universities work well
that's what you do but if you look at
the mechanics if you look at what's
actually involved in learning the
Chinese language and this is sometimes
comically true the university will not
do very much for me aside from giving me
a library card and a desk in the
opportunity to teach myself believe me I
know some examples were where people
paid a lot of money to study a language
university and they didn't even get that
they got incredibly little support of
course I used to be married to an
anthropologist anthropology is a very
very strange field that way the
relationship between universities as
educational institutions and research
institutions so you answer two questions
in this video one of which was sent in
by a particular viewer a supporter on
patreon
who's asking about the nature of
research and the other is a question
that's coming from many many many
different people in just the last couple
of weeks asking about the value of
reading books what yeah
I got this question again and again why
read books and it seems observed and it
seems insincere and it seems stupid but
many of the people asking the question
are indeed being entirely sincere and I
get this letter from a guy named Lee and
Leroy writes to me and asks hazel I've
been thinking quite a bit about your
recent videos on regret and there's a
New York Times article on the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN and generally
about spending excessive time and energy
on efforts that may not have positive
outcomes
I'm a 23 year old physics PhD student
studying antimatter and particle
detector design and I feel like a wave
you may be wasted by potential to make a
positive difference in the world well I
enjoy what I do scientists often get a
free pass on thinking critically about
what they spend their time and energy on
just because their work is so
intellectually challenging studying pure
physics will never have as direct of an
impact as working on clean energy
science policy or even finding a way to
apply my stem knowledge to vegan
activism however I understand that
physics has changed philosophy and
society in some profound ways my
question for you is to what extent are
pure Sciences awardee endeavor even if
there are no obvious applications the
only people I know that will take this
question seriously are convinced that
physics is the most important work in
the world seemingly because it is
difficult or elegant or something of the
sort and he says correctly I'm sure
you've experienced something similar
with British scholar scholars of
Buddhism who who really believe this or
thing and I'd like to hear an opinion
outside of my own academic research in
physics bubble okay so great question
the meaning of the word experiment
absolutely by definition if something is
experimental if it's truly an experiment
then the outcomes are unknown right and
this becomes a kind of problem and
corrupting influence in academia because
churches often designed in such a way
that some kind of important finding has
to be at the end or people have to be
able to dissimulate some kind of
important finding what if you do four
years of anthropological research and
it's not even a null hypothesis you
really have no particular findings what
if you know you engage in years and I've
seen I recently looked at the the laws
concerning internships in the in the
sciences in areas exactly like physics
and chemistry where people can do
academic internships for years and years
and years being paid very very little
money to be part of you know experiments
that go on for very long time and what
is the outcome the outcome may really be
unknown and it may be trivial right the
findings may not be what anyone was was
hoping to discover however I think the
real question we all have to answer when
engaged in research is what kind of
person are you going to become and I'm
here absolutely refusing to fall into
the trap of saying well how much money
you gonna make because that's not the
question that's not the constraint
that's not the limit we're surrounded by
people with money a mystery we just
vacation in the South of France
what's the financial worth of any ten
people we walk past or ten yachts we
walk past so it depends on where you
live even in Detroit I'm surrounded by
very wealthy people all the time we were
just in Las Vegas and you walk past
people who are not just wealthy but
wasting a lot of money money is
everywhere and yet the potential to make
a positive difference in the world is
scarce
why because self-cultivation is scarce
self-discipline is scarce clarity of
mind is scarce right what's common is
the mind frame to sit at a poker table
smoking cigarettes and drinking beer and
ignoring a beautiful
in a bikini who's dancing about three
meters away from you while you you know
play with these cards it's sickening but
this is the human condition this is the
the kind of ignorance in the unexamined
life we're all born into and some people
play poker and some people play video
games and for some people it's its other
vices right but the ultimate constraint
on your ability to make the world a
better place is you the vast majority of
people on earth the vast majority of
people who could see this video what
they need is the motivation to engage in
learning research and self-improvement
in the absence of an institution to help
them in the absence of a university in
the absence of any clear credential or
financial reward at the end of that
process of learning doing a PhD in
physics I think what you've hinted at
here is that you've correctly
apprehended that in some ways this is
changing you this is changing you
psychologically and philosophically it
changes your outlook on the world you
look at the scientists around you again
it's in there briefly but you're
alluding to the fact these are people
who've adopted a kind of ideology a kind
of scientism a sense of self-importance
a sense of mission and they're in some
ways blinded to the importance of
politics the real world maybe you know
the world outside of the chalkboard and
the laboratory they've shut themselves
off from certain aspects of reality as
history unfolds around them and they've
convinced themselves to narrowly focus
on areas of research that could make a
big difference in the world
but as you've alluded to in all
probability may not you can spend
millions of dollars and years of your
life on research and the outcomes may be
merely academic the outcomes may be less
decisive even than a null hypothesis
they may kind of discover nothing one
way or the other that's part of the
definition of an experiment right but
what kind of person are you going to
become and it has been a somewhat
crushing revelation from
to realize when looking at many PhD
programs that if I get on this path if I
do this I am NOT going to like the
person I will become this is gonna make
me a worse person I'm not saying that of
all PhD programs but we're looking at a
specific program looking at the process
what I'm gonna learn what I'm gonna do
even the social process I have really
had to question with different kinds of
PhD programs not how much money am I
gonna make what kind of person am I
gonna be at the end of this and I'm
being straight with you I did not like
the answer even compared to the option
of joining the military I know if I join
the army it's gonna change me I know and
I signed signed up to join the army I
mean that was a really life-altering
conclusion to come to this relates to
the broader and simpler question of why
read books at all over time these
activities change who you are and what
you have to offer the world if your
hobby every weekend is to spend the
whole weekend knitting socks
after five years think of the enormous
collection of socks you will have built
up and the skill you will have developed
in knitting and you can give socks as
gifts all your coworkers it's easy to
imagine what your life is like you have
a closet full of socks after five years
and a very narrow skill set as a result
and it's gonna change you change who you
are you're the guy who knits socks all
weekend every weekend that may seem like
a ridiculous example if we're really
being honest how it is knitting socks
compared to playing video games what is
going to accumulate over time this is
very simply the justification for
reading books and we're here talking
about of course nonfiction if you took
the same amount of time over five years
reading books learning new things not in
preparation for a PhD not in preparation
for a career but to make yourself a
better person and to make the world a
better place
think really about what accumulates I
talked to someone today who is a
longtime viewer the channel and they
explained to me what an important
guiding influence this channel has been
in their lives if they were someone who
couldn't get ahead in school for many
years who couldn't get formal
credentials formal education someone for
whom getting a PhD seemed totally
unattainable and one message they took
from this channel was hey take yourself
seriously as intellectual get motivated
take responsibility for your own
intellectual development stop looking
for the outside world to provide you
with a teacher ultimately it's on you
whether you're gonna live an unexamined
life or a meaningful life whether you
can learn with you teach yourself and
this particular person obviously a lot
of the emphasis in her learning has been
on language learning I think she
understood correctly whether or not she
got this idea from my channel maybe it
was her own interest to begin with that
language learning is something where the
university or formal institutions don't
give you a whole lot of help and where
you can make a lot of progress on your
own on your own time without without a
laboratory without any particular
equipment that would be provided to you
by by large institutions a few days
before that I had a series of e-mails
back and forth with a viewer of the
channel actually a recent viewer recent
supporter on patreon I don't think he's
watching for that long but he saw my
videos dealing with indigenous peoples
indigenous languages history of
colonialism genocide he got really
motivated to start learning the language
that's indigenous in his area of the
United States of America but a really
interesting correspondence back and
forth about how best he's gonna proceed
with that so he's decided to commit the
time and energy again outside of
academia he doesn't have a professor he
doesn't have a tenure track job ahead of
him he doesn't have a PhD coming down
you know why
to make himself a better person to make
the world a better place the people who
are going to hear the message this
channel has to deliver you are the
people who have ears to hear the people
who are ready for that message to take
it on board and I think some people
probably see what I'm talking about on
this channel and maybe it burns away in
the back of their minds and maybe 10
years later they think you know what
there's another way to live
you know the unexamined life is not
worth living now I'm gonna start living
a more gathered focused meaningful life
with a real sense of purpose and a real
sense of of self-discipline I think one
of the tragedies were all burdened with
in life is that the options were denied
tend to just be the options were not
aware of the options we didn't even
consider what's like oh you you stop and
realize your whole life would have been
different if you'd studied Latin back
when you were in high school or he would
study Greek and it wasn't offered at
your school but there was another high
school just a few blocks away in the
same city where they were teaching Latin
or they weren't teaching ancient Greek
and he stopped and realized what if I
had even been presented that with that
option what if someone had just said to
me hey you know you can do a transfer
course you could go over to that other
high school and study Latin and that's
gonna open up other opportunities for
you and you didn't even consider it when
I was growing up I never had a role
model I never had anyone to imitate I
never had anyone to follow not even on
the simplest questions we've dealt with
here I never had the idea that you could
be a hundred percent sober I never had
the idea you could be a hundred percent
vegan I never had the idea that you
could just not compromise with cultural
expectations that are imposed on you I
never had the idea and a lot of you guys
I know laugh at this me being honest
about my sex life and tell you about my
sex life I never had the idea that you
could be a real intellectual and be
honest and open about sex I totally grew
up with the idea that being intellectual
meant living in celibacy and of course I
found that affirmed in Asian philosophy
not just European
guys I am NOT out here telling you that
I have all the answers but I'm really
pleased to see the productive outcomes
of my at least raising these questions